Today's episode, Natalie and I
interviewed Dr. Seaff Freed, an American
professor of biology, genetics, and
biochemistry at Boston College who's
been published in over 150 peer-reviewed
publications. He received his PhD from
the University of Illinois in 1976. His
postdoctoral fellowship studies were in
the department of neurology at the Yale
University School of Medicine where he
served as an assistant professor in
neurology. His research focuses on
mechanisms of chronic disease such as
cancer, epilepsy, neurodeenerative lipid
storage diseases and caloric restriction
diets. So without further ado, here's
our interview with Professor Seaf.
>> Hold up. One more thing. If you have not
yet scheduled your 45minute free
exploration call to find out what the
root cause of your symptoms are and your
next steps to getting symptomfree,
you are going to want to pause this
podcast and go do that right now. So I
invite you to go to
nutritionwithconfidence.com,
book your free exploration call and find
out how to get your results and what is
possible for you.
Well, welcome Professor Seaf Freed.
Appreciate you uh taking the time to be
on the podcast today. I I wanted to
start off with um I think most of us
have grown up with this understanding of
cancer development as largely being
based in genetics. you just get uh just
luck of the draw, bad genes. Um so I
wanted to start with could could you
describe the origins of this theory as
as cancer being uh genetically based?
>> Yeah. Well, thank you very much. It's
nice nice to be here today. Yeah, that
that is the key that is the key question
uh that has to be addressed. You you
have to realize that in science um we
move forward with our understanding of
nature by developing theories to explain
facts. So facts are collected, facts are
analyzed and then they're interpreted
under a particular theory. Um and that
theory can persist for long periods of
time or it can be uh overthrown by new
in new information that explains the
facts in a different way. You know, one
of the ways that we look at these things
is we we look at the um the heliocentric
versus the geocentric theory of the
solar system. And for uh 1,800 years
from the time of Aristotle through
Clauddios TMI um astronomers thought
that the earth was immovable and sun,
moon and all the planets revolved around
the immovable stationary earth. And then
it was the work of Capernicus, Kepler
and Galileo that provided new new
information um uh that if if you
rearrange some of the uh celestial
bodies, putting putting the sun in the
center and the earth as simply another
planet, a lot of the difficulty in
plotting orbits and and making uh
predictions on where celestial bodies
should be became far more clear uh than
the epicycle
Ian system of Claudius TMI. Um but uh
Capernicus did use uh all of those same
mathematical strategies that TMI used
but also ran into the same difficulty in
not being able to accurately predict uh
where the celestial bodies should be.
Each epicycle provided some uh comfort
uh to solving the problem but was never
never completely ideal. But when the uh
sun was placed in the center, then the
experimental evidences became so much
more clear and and uh corroborated and
predictability could happen. Uh we're at
the same position today in the cancer
field as we were uh back then. Um we
have uh thought of cancer as a genetic
disease based primarily on a silent
assumption and confirmation bias. Um,
you know, it's a funny thing. Uh, uh,
when Watson and Crick discovered the
structure of the DNA, it set off, uh, a
phenomenal, uh, run to better
understand, uh, biology at a molecular
reductionist level. And everybody
thought that we should be studying DNA
in every which way. And of course, that
led to tremendous uh, advances in our
understanding of uh, of biology for
sure. And cancer was uh sucked into this
whole whirlpool. Uh just like all the
other fields of many many of the other
fields of biology
uh cell biology, biochemistry you know
everything now could be explained in the
form of of genes. Um and uh when cancer
was looked at, of course, you could see
broken chromosomes, you could see
genetic mutations
and uh there was a conscious effort on
the part of the National Cancer
Institute, the National Institutes of
Health, uh that we should um focus more
on cancer's genetic problems as a way to
potentially solve uh solve the disorder.
And um in the 1970s and 80s we launched
the uh cancer genome project uh which
was designed to find uh every type of
mutation in tumor cells uh and thereby
target those mutations that were
supposed to be responsible for
disregulated cell growth. And that and
that essentially is what cancer is. Cell
division out of control
uh um you know disregulated cell growth.
uh caused caused by genetic mutations
mutations in the nuclear DNA and they're
called somatic mutations. So the cancer
is the somatic mutation theory of cancer
says that over time and age and things
like this carcinogens radiation all
these things they'll cause mutations in
the nuclear DNA and those mutations will
cause a disregulation of the signaling
pathways in the cell leading to uh
disregulated cell growth. So um uh the
promise uh then we got into precision
medicine. We were going to we found so
many mutations now we could target them
with precision um personalized therapy
precision targeting drugs and you hear a
lot about this today with the
imunotherapies and this kind of thing.
Um and the hope was that we would
eventually with our deep knowledge of
the genetics of cancer, we would be able
to solve the problem because we could
target these various mutations killing
uh preventing the disregulated cell
growth by targeting the very mutation
causing the disregulated cell growth.
Very logical, supported by massive
evidence showing how many mutations
there were in cancer cells. But as our
technology became more and more
sophisticated, we started to find tens
of thousands and millions of genetic
mutations in some of these cancers. And
then if you take a cancer out of
someone's tissue, regardless of breast,
colon, lung, brain, and you separate out
the cells and then you grow up each cell
individually and look at the gene
mutations, they're all different from
each cell in the tumor has a different
constellation of mutations, making it
extremely difficult to really figure out
what's going on. and and what's more uh
scientists began to categorize
reclassify
some of the mutations in tumor cells. So
not all of them are bad. Uh we had then
termed the driver only the so-called
driver mutations uh were considered the
really bad guys. So you'd have passenger
mutations that just happen to be mutated
in for something that really doesn't do
much. But then the driver mutations are
the ones that we need to target to
manage the disease. And this has led to
these enormous genome projects and and
the national institutes of health uh
spending billions of dollars uh
pharmaceutical companies building drugs
to target mutations. Carti uh
imunotherapies, Katruda, Abdivo, they're
all trying to target different kinds of
mutations. And um this is where it is
today. If you want to learn how to
implement the ketogenic diet and the
press pulse protocol into your cancer
management, just visit school.com/keto
for cancer, the new community by our
research analyst Johnny Rockermeer.
Within this new community platform, you
can connect with other patients and
learn from their experiences.
You can also just search through the
posts other members have already made.
You will have access to our classroom
section as well, which provides
practical advice and tools for the best
results. These sections cover all parts
of the press pulse protocol that you
should implement. Starting with the
general scientific concepts by Dr.
Thomas Ciphford, we will show you how to
start the ketogenic diet, including
which foods to choose and which to
avoid. Additionally, we prepared a list
of doctors specialized in metabolic
therapy as well as details about
glutamine inhibition and hyperbaric
oxygen protocols.
So, take a look around at school.com/
keto for cancer.
The the problem is we continue to use
poisonous chemicals and radiation and
these extremely toxic therapies, but
they were supposed to be replaced by our
understanding of the genetics of cancer.
So once we really once we could could
capture the the the information from the
genome projects, we would no longer need
to irdiate and treat patients with toxic
poisons. The problem is this has not
come to fruition. because cancer is not
a genetic disease. The theory under
which this enormous enormous enterprise
was launched was incorrect. Uh uh
Warberg uh originally showed that cancer
was a mitochondrial disorder. Um and
what I have done is followed what
Warberg said and went to back to why he
what he said uh why he was correct and
why he was not correct. we have cleared
up a lot of the mess associated with
Warberg's original observations. Clearly
Warberg was right uh that cancer starts
with a chronic disruption of energy
within the organel that generates energy
through oxygen, oxidative
phosphorilation, oxidative respiration.
We breathe air, our cells get energy
from the air we breathe. Every breath we
exhale, CO2 and water, those are the
waste products. uh of normal
respiration. Cancer cells get damaged,
yes, from carcinogens, yes, from
radiation, intermittent hypoxy, a
variety of ankcogenic viruses. But all
of those um um um provocative agents, if
you will, uh damage oxidative
phosphorilation chronically in some
person's body, in a particular
population of cells. And in order to
survive uh the cancer cells become
suffocated because they can't use oxygen
effectively. So there's a protracted or
extended period by which the cell starts
to adapt to a fermentation metabolism
which is energy without oxygen. Now this
is the energy that all cells uh uh all
organisms used before oxygen came onto
the atmosphere 2.5 billion years ago. We
had all living organisms before oxygen.
They were all fermenttors. they all used
a non oxygen-based energy because there
was no oxygen in the atmosphere. So uh
when the relationship between one form
of bacteria cyanobacteria they started
producing oxygen through photosynthesis
and then we started develop metazones
multisellular organisms which we already
now we're living today as the result of
these events we breathe oxygen and uh we
produce CO2 but in the in the early
development there was no oxygen so the
waste products were these fermentation
waste products cancer cells fall back
today on these ancient pathways of
fermentation just as they were their
heirloom pathways. They exist today, but
they've become dominant in the cancer
cell. And we know that because the waste
products are products of fermentation,
that is lactic acid and suinic acid.
That's clearly telling us that these
guys are not using oxygen. They're using
these ancient fermentation pathways. And
the other thing, as I said, today all
these different cancers have thousands
of mutations. Everybody is different
from each other. Every cell in the tumor
is fermenting. It's not using oxygen as
a major source of energy. So that tells
us clearly uh what's going on in these
cancer cells. It says they're all
fermenttors. And then when you know
that, that immediately tells you they
can't use oxy uh respiratory
fuels like fatty acids and ketone bodies
because you need a good mitochondria to
do that. And all cancer cells that we
have found have abnormalities in the
number structure and function of their
mitochondria thereby being dependent on
a fermentation metabolism. So the
solution to the cancer problem I I want
to say a solution and probably the
solution is simultaneously target two
fermentable fuels driving the
disregulated growth while transitioning
the body off to fatty acids and ketones
allowing our normal cells to use what we
evolved to use. But the tumor cells
can't use those fuels because their
machinery to use those fuels is
defective. Very clear.
It it immediately throws the whole field
into a uh into a tivy because you're
realizing that a multi-billion dollar
industry built up around an incorrect
theory. And and the result of that is
1,700 people a day in the United States
are dying from cancer. That's 70 an
hour. 70 an hour. As we're speaking, 70
people will be dead as the result of
this because there's an it's an
incorrect theory on all the things we're
doing to treat cancer patients are based
on an incorrect theory or ancient or old
ways improved a little bit but not not
uh understanding what the nature of the
real problem is. So why are we
continuing to do this? It's because a
silent assumption that cancer is a
genetic disease and confirmation bias
because everybody was led to believe
this and they all continue to think that
way. So until that changes, we're not
going to change the death rate uh uh
significantly in any meaningful way.
I've heard that there's it takes about
14 years for new research to get
implemented in uh clinical practice with
doctors implementing new protocols and
things like that. How long has your how
long have you been doing research or how
long um you mentioned Otto Warberg. I'm
familiar with his his initial findings
were when when was that his research and
then when did you start your
>> 1920s he he did that in the 1920s. He's
a very fantastic character. He has a
very colorful history. He he fought in
the German Pian army calvary officer in
the first world war. Einstein told him
he should be in the lab working. uh he
was from a very u a background of highly
educated and top leading scientists. His
his um peer groups were all these heavy
scientists. He was a very powerful
quantitative biochemist. Uh he he did
not leave Germany. He was half Jewish
and uh Germans had a solution for
anybody that was full or half Jewish.
And Hitler did not uh uh exterminate uh
Warberg because he understood that if
Warberg knew more about cancer than
anybody else in the world at that time.
Hitler feared cancer because his mother
died of breast cancer. So he figured if
I'm not going to execute the guy that
could potentially solve the problem of
cancer. So he was allowed to continue to
do his research in Germany during the
Holocaust. uh uh and he was at he didn't
like Hitler in any stretch of the
imagination but he wanted to just do his
research and be left alone. Um he did
receive the Nobel Prize in 1931 because
he found the uh um the what we call the
respiratory enzyme the respiratory
protein in the mitochondria that allowed
us to generate energy from oxygen. He
never received a Nobel Prize for his
work on cancer. Uh Hitler forbid Germans
from receiving Nobel prizes. He was
nominated but several times but only one
time did he get it. Um after the war uh
he was very uh arrogant and strong about
his work. But he was swept away uh with
the Watson and Crick discovery of DNA.
So they more or less said Warberg was P.
His ideas were no longer relevant. Uh he
was just ignored and they all ran off
chasing genes uh where we are today. Uh
so uh what I did is I went back because
I did research here at Boston College in
our department of biology and I was
seeing results that were more consistent
with Warberg than they were with the
somatic mutation theory. So I said who
is this guy Warberg? I mean I knew his
name but I didn't know what he actually
did. So then you have to go back and do
a real deep dive on what he said. I had
papers translated from German into
English and I started to evaluate his
formulations and things like this and uh
looked at it where did he make mistakes
where was he correct so we then started
to do experiments and fortunately a lot
of others in the field were doing
experiments that actually supported
Warberg's theory without them even
knowing that it did. So what I did is I
saw those experiments and I said geez
these experiments are supporting what
Warberg is saying you guys don't even
know about it. So, I put a lot of this
together with the nuclear mitochondrial
transfer experiments and all these kinds
of things. And then I looked and I found
that I found papers saying there's no
mutations in some cancers. How? I said,
"Wait a minute, wait a minute, wait a
minute. How could you have a cancer with
there's no mutation? That that doesn't
support your sematic mutation theory,
but they're fermenttors." Oh, okay. And
then we found all these driver gene
mutations now in normal tissues that
never form cancer. How you explain that?
And then the nuclear transfer
experiments where you take the nucleus
of a tumor cell with all the genetic
mutations and put it in the cytoplasm of
a normal cell you have growth
regulation. Even though you have all the
mutations still there, the cells are not
disregulated. On the other hand, if I
take the nucleus of a normal cell and
put it into the cytoplasm of a tumor
cell, you get disregulated growth
because the cytoplasm with the
mitochondria controlling the events.
Work from Israel and Schaefer elegant,
beautiful experiments. So you put all
that together and all of a sudden you
have clear, massively clear evidence
cancer is a mitochondrial metabolic
disorder driven by fermentation
metabolism. Cannot switch to respiratory
fuels like fatty acids and ketone
bodies. It's unbelievable. Yet they they
it's I think it's so shocking that the
field can't can't accept it because of
the confirmation bias. They have been
brainwashed into thinking that this is a
genetic disease. And no way in hell are
they going to realize that this can't
this is the they it's it's too
disruptive to the entire industry. It's
the academic industry. The NIH says it's
a genetic disease. It says right on
their website cancer is a genetic
disease. All the pharmaceutical
companies building drugs based on cancer
is a genetic disease. The hospitals are
making large amounts of money treating
people with radiation and these toxic uh
chemotherapies based on cancer being a
genetic disease. If it's not a genetic
disease, then what are we going to do?
We have to remove the fermentable fuels
and transition the body over to
non-fermentable fuels.
>> Yeah.
>> You see what you're saying?
>> Too dramatic.
>> Yeah. I'm curious if we can talk more
about that. So these two fuel sources
I've heard you talk about glucose
glutamine that fuel this fermentation
process where cancer proliferates will
you speak more as to my understanding
would be carbohydrate intake uh eating
like a high carb high sugar diet would
contribute to these glucose levels you
speak more to those driving factors
>> yeah well I mean there's been a large
number we we published the first report
at least in mouse uh where we showed
using linear linear regression analysis
that the higher the blood sugar in the
blood of the mouse that had the tumor,
the faster the tumor would grow and the
lower the sugar, the sm the the the
slower the tumor would grow. And that's
when we said we saw this over and over
and over again and we said who wait how
how do you explain this? That's when I
saw Warberg said the tumors are
dependent on on on glucose for growth
because that drives this this
fermentation pathway in the cytoplasm.
So we said wow this is support and then
others other uh physicians and clinics
started to look at blood sugar related
to breast cancer, colon cancer, brain
cancer, all these different cancers,
lung cancer and they were able to show
the same thing. uh the if a person has
lung cancer, brain cancer, colon cancer,
uh their their survival was
significantly related to how how high
the blood sugar was. So clearly it tells
us you got to lower blood sugar if you
want to try to manage your tumor. Um and
despite that, uh they said, "Oh no,
sugar has nothing to do." I don't know
how to how do you explain it? I mean,
you show all these data and then you
say, "No, sugar has nothing to do with
it." um sugar is not a carcinogen but
it's a fuel for the disregulated cell
growth of the tumor. So that was known
uh for many years and I think it's
widely accepted among most logical
understanding scientists that glucose is
a driving fuel uh for the tumor cell.
Maybe not for oncologists in the clinic
but certainly for scientists that
understand cancer metabolism for sure.
The glutamine issue is an amino acid.
Okay. So let's go back to the glucose.
Most of the foods we eat in one way or
another uh are are broken down. Not all
of them uh are broken down to glucose.
Uh and it's and it's metabolized through
the 10step Mdhoff pawns pathway to
pyuvate. Pyuvate is a threecarbon
molecule and it's fully oxidized in the
mitochondria with CO2 and water produced
as the end products. That's what the
respiration tells us. Now the um
glutamine issue people in my field of uh
cancer metabolism all we all understand
that glutamine is another fuel that
cancer cells can use. However, we have
shown uniquely from my work here at BC
and my collaborator collaboration with
Christo Shinopoulos at Seml Weiss
University in Budapest. uh we have shown
that the glutamine is fermented
uh it's an amino acid fermentation in
the mitochondria. So the same organel
that produces the majority of energy
through oxidative phosphorilation also
has a capacity to ferment an amino acid
without minimal use of oxygen. That's
the big breakthrough. So uh and Warberg
did not know about this and most cancer
biologists don't know about it and when
we try to explain it to them it's not
easy to understand. So um so the field
has has used oxygen consumption as a
surrogate for oxidative phosphorilation.
So when you see a normal cell and a
tumor cell they're both consuming
oxygen. So that leads individuals at at
a similar level sometimes. So that that
leads leaves some people to say well
look the cancer cell can respire just as
well as the normal cell. The normal cell
is using the oxygen for energy through
oxidative phosphorilation. The cancer
cell is using oxygen to produce reactive
oxygen species ROS which are
carcinogenic and mutagenic causing the
mutations in the nucleus.
They're fermenting the glutamine.
they're getting. So if you're looking at
the mitochondria, you see ATP energy
coming out, but the normal cell, the ATP
is coming out from an oxidative
phosphorilation mechanism, where in the
cancer cell is coming out from a
fermentation mechanism.
>> Even myself, I I I sometimes I but we
have the evidence to support that.
>> Wow. Yeah. So So kind of going back to a
little bit of like the basics of energy,
like a healthy cell has different
mechanisms that it can use. it can to
make ATP energy, right? But with when
you have no oxygen, you have the
anorobic
>> corre like the Could you describe that a
little bit more for people? Yeah.
>> Yeah. So, uh um fermentation is energy
without oxygen usually. Okay, let me
give you an example. Uh heart attack uh
if per people have a heart stops
beating. Okay. Uh and if you don't get
the heart to to pump the blood and get
you're going to be dead. All right. So,
um uh that's that's uh it tells us that
we need oxygen to be alive. Okay. Uh
that's a heart attack. Now, when you
have a heart attack, immediately you see
uh the waste products of fermentation
appear in the bloodstream. So our bodies
can survive for a short period of time
up to five or seven minutes depending
upon how what kind of shape you're in uh
without oxygen. We immediately shift to
a fermentation metabolism but it's very
inefficient. Um so the waste products
are lactic acid and suinic acid and
that's the waste products of of glucose
fermentation and amino acid
fermentation, glutamine fermentation. So
they immediately jump up in your
bloodstream in order for us to keep
ourselves alive. Now if you don't have
oxygen coming in in a certain period of
time that those fermentation pathways
are not capable of providing long-term
support. Now cancer let's look at the
cancer and the other thing too you know
the poison cyanide right you know about
cyanide. You know it's poison right?
Remember Jonestown they put the cyanide
in the Kool-Aid and they always say the
guy drinks the Kool-Aid dies instantly.
Okay, that shuts down oxidative
phosphorilation quickly and you die.
It's a permanent shutdown of the Warberg
enzyme, the Warberg that he cytochrome
s. Very interesting. Cancer cells don't
die from cyanide. Oh. Oh, that's great.
Right. So, if someone were to have a big
tumor in their body and say, I want to I
don't want to live anymore. Let me drink
cyanide. They'd be dead, but the tumor
would not their tumor would still be
alive because it doesn't die. It uses a
fermentation mechanism. Um also in the
presence even in your body uh when the
tumor is growing uh even in the 100%
oxygen the tumor is still fermenting
still throwing out lactic acid and
suinic acid as I said when you have a
heart attack and you get oxygen suinic
acid and lactic acid go away because
you're respiring again the cancer cell
cannot respire it's locked in so it's
always throwing out these waste products
those are signals that's telling us
these guys can't respire what are they
doing to survive glucose and glutamine
fermentation. How do you kill the cancer
cell? Take away its fuel, dies, can't no
more energy.
>> Not that complicated, right?
>> Right. So, can you talk about how
because our her healthy cells can also
use ketones as energy? And so, can you
describe how being uh like with this
metabolic theory like being on a
ketogenic diet can help the healthy
cells compete with the cancer cells with
and then shrinking and and killing the
cancer in a way or starving it?
>> Well, we we we started the ketogenic
diet only because what really works is
water only fasting. And I said, 'If I'm
going to come out and tell people that
in order to get rid of your cancer, you
can't eat anything for 30 days, they're
going to say, "This guy's some sort of a
nut." So, uh, I worked in the epilepsy
field for years, and we were using
ketogenic diets to manage seizures in
children. And, uh, was developed by, um,
Wilder at at Mayo Clinic in 1921. It was
very effective. And what you're doing is
you're transitioning away from sugar,
glucose basically, to a new fuel, ketone
bodies. And we can do that now during
during our Paleolithic period. Our
species for hundreds of thousands of
years was always in a state of
nutritional ketosis. Mainly mainly
because we didn't have highly processed
carbohydrates and we were very we had a
lot of exercise and we didn't have uh
Dunkin Donuts on every corner. Um uh we
had to kill and eat animals. Uh anything
hunter gatherers a lot of exercise, a
lot of meat eating, a lot of this kind
of stuff. But all of it is is that it
lowers blood. Your blood sugar is still
very low. You're not taking in anything
and you're exercising a lot. So you're
using fat a as a fuel and and the fat
burn makes ketone bodies ketone. So it's
like a wood chipper. If you take a
longchain fatty acid that's stored in
your atapost tissue and you don't eat oh
your brain needs most of the needs.
Where your brain gonna get energy if
you're not eating anything. So you take
the fat from your fat cells, your
atyposytes, they go into the bloodstream
and they go to your liver and the liver
ch it's like putting a big branch into a
wood chipper. So you get these water
soluble ketone bodies that go into your
bloodstream and they fuel the brain when
glucose is deficient. They fuel kidney,
they fuel muscle, they fuel So all of
our cells can most of our cells can
switch back over to ketone bodies or
fatty acids, both um because those give
us the energy when we're not eating
food. Okay. Um the tumor cells,
unfortunately, the poor poor tumor cells
can't make that adaptation because you
need a good strong mitochondria and they
have defective mitochondria. So they
can't switch to fatty acids or ketones,
but our normal bodies can. So now
ketogenic diet we just said oh well that
seems to be a little bit uh potentially
easier to do than saying not not eating
food for 30 days which is really hard.
So um so it's not so much the ketogenic
diet it's the entrance into nutritional
ketosis the way we were during
paleolithic periods. So, we developed
the glucose ketone index calculator,
which you can measure with a drop of
blood. Um, a G, we call it the GKI, and
the GKI will tell us whether we're in
nutritional ketosis by measuring the
ratio of of of glucose to ketone bodies.
And if you can get a one:1 on a millolar
ratio, then you're going to be in a
state of nutritional ketosis. So when
you're in that zone, uh, what little
glucose is available is going to the
brain and the muscle. It ain't going
anywhere else for the most part. So all
the other organs and they're going to be
burning fatty acids and ketones. So the
tumor cells under in a state of
nutritional keto, whether it's a
ketogenic diet, water only fasting,
pescatarian, carnivore, don't make any
difference. If you can get into ketosis,
then the tumor cells are going to be at
a competitive disadvantage. So they're
going to be struggling for their
existence while the rest of the cells
which evolve to use this are are now can
can you can survive become healthy and
the tumor cells gradually to get
degraded but then you have to come in
with the glutamine targeting to polish
the remainders off. So, it's a you you
put the choke hold on the glucose and
then you come in with pulsing the
glutamine and it's a magnificent
non-toxic therapeutic strategy to keep
your body super healthy while you're
degrading your tumor without toxicity.
>> Yeah.
>> How does that sound?
>> Yeah, that sounds amazing. I really want
to get into the specifics with the
pulsing blocking the glutamine glutamine
but um but first can we focus a little
bit more on ketosis because I use a lot
of the ketogenic diet and um I I think
it's helpful for people to understand
what's the what are why do we want to
test blood ketones and then and and
what's the difference I guess the
benefits to tracking the GKI versus just
ketone levels. I'll stop there because
that's the RA. Yeah, that's the ratio.
Um because if you're now in diabetes
sometimes you can have high ketones and
high glucose. We're talking about normal
physiology here.
>> Okay. So the lower the blood sugar it's
because there's a um insulin responds to
sugar. Okay. When you eat when you eat
sugar um uh insulin goes up. All right.
Because you take insulin drives the
sugar into the cells. This is what the
way it does. But if you don't eat
anything and blood sugar gradually goes
down, insulin goes down. But where's the
energy come? So then there's another
hormone called glucagon and that turns
on and that makes gluconneogenesis and
also mobilize fat. But the amount of
sugar from gluconneogenesis where we
take amino acids and and glycerol
backbone. So we can make body can make
sugar but it's very little and what
little you have is going to go to your
brain and your muscle ain't going to the
tumor. So, um, but you're trans, what
you're doing is you're transitioning
your body away from, uh, a surfit of
sugar to, uh, uh, using fats and ketone
bodies as an alternative energy to
sugar. And, and that requires a a
metabolic adaptation, uh, to this to
this new condition. And, uh, there's a
lot of ways people can get into this
state. Uh, you can do water only
fasting. So, we found that water only
fasting is very hard. Uh, and you know
why it's so hard? Because our brains are
addicted to glucose. So, jumping off
food, you're going it's very hard. You
you not eat for two or three days, all
of a sudden, you know, you're ready to
gnaw on something, you know. Uh, but if
you go slow, like you you can take uh
foods that have very very little
carbohydrate in them. uh you do
exercise, you can eat meat or whatever
whatever whatever would have low sugar.
Your body slowly adapts. Um and then if
you jump into water only fasting, it's
not so dramatic. Uh but if you try to go
cold turkey, it's very very hard. So and
then you and then we measure the ratio
with the blood meter. Right now there
the libras are coming out. There's a
free libra for glucose, but it's not
there yet for ketone. So eventually
we'll have a arm patch that'll tell us
what to do and then we'll we'll know
what what when they're in that zone.
When we're in that zone then you know
this is the zone of metabolic
nutritional ketosis and you get healthy.
>> Yeah. I love that. Yeah. And we the we
want to use what's uh circling in the
bloodstream. We want to be testing
what's in the bloodstream, not the
ketone bodies that's leaving the body,
right? To make sure that we're in
keto there there are those machines or
that you can blow into the thing and the
light comes on for ketosis uh and you
can have urine strips uh this kind of
thing but but the blood is more accurate
uh it really tells you what what's
bathing what's bathing your tissues uh
because you know um the urine is is
those are releasing mechanism I'm
blowing out ketone bodies which is
acetone acetone is a a non-enzyatic
degradation product of of ketone body
synthesis. So you get acetone, you blow
and all of a sudden you get some light.
Um and then you pee on a stick and and
you have a little number there, but but
color change, you know, oh, you got a
lot of ketones, but but you can't the
GKI is a is a a millolar ratio of these
two metabolites in your blood at that
moment. And for the cancer patients, uh
when they get into a we put them in we
get we gradually transition them to to a
G a glucose ketone index of 2.0 zero or
below. This is the zone that the tumor
cells now start to suffer. And then when
they're in that when the patient is in
that zone, we come in now with the
glutamine targeting pulsing uh uh to
polish off these tumor cells. Um so so
it's a strategy a diet drug uh strategy.
And I don't I don't want to say that
chemo and radiation and all these other
things can't be effective. They're
massively more effective when the body
is in nutritional ketosis. So um a lot
of these uh radiation chemo you don't
need as much you don't need to do it as
long and all of a sudden the pay you can
kill these tumor cells minimizing
toxicity but you you have to get the
body first into nutritional ketosis
which we have defined as 2.0 zero or
below. And I've had people struggle. Uh,
oh, I can't get to two. I said, well,
you might have to do water only fasting.
Sorry to say. Sorry to say, you know,
but but we try to make it an easy trans
an easier transition. And uh then you
can put it on your cell phone, right?
You got your cell phone here. So, you
can then man monitor your GKI during a
daily, you know, uh time. We do use
urine strips in between because the
ketone strips are a little bit more
expensive than the glucose strips. So,
uh, these are blood strip. You take your
drop of blood, you put the strip, you
put it into the meter, bing, tells you
what your mill, and then you take
another strip, squeeze a little bit more
blood, bing, and you get your ketone,
push the button, bang, here's your GKI.
>> Yeah, with the keto mojo, right?
>> Yeah. Keto mojo. Yeah.
>> Yeah, that's a good one. that's already
geared up to push the button uh to give
you you know I it's a very simple
division. You just have to divide
glucose by 18 and then you get glucose
in millimmer and divide it by ketone
which comes in millimmer. But no no too
difficult for people. They just want to
push the button get the number. So that
keto mojo has that. You don't have to
really do much. Just push the button get
your GKI.
>> Yeah. And do you have a a suggested time
when people take their glucose and
ketone levels before meals, after meals,
morning, evening? Well, that's the
excitement of of using your body as your
own experimental uh machine. You
everybody's different. So, in order to
in order to know that, you have to take
it several times during the day at
first. You know, it's like experimenting
with yourself. Um you know, eat certain
things. Uh you know, you feel good.
Okay, what's my GKI? You know, oh, it's
still high. Okay, don't eat that. Um and
then find out what time during the day.
Usually uh it can vary. People sometimes
get the lowest GKI in the late morning,
sometimes in the middle of the
afternoon. It can be all different times
uh about this. So um uh you know it it
all it all depends on the person. So um
uh and that that's why I said once the
person understands
uh the the concepts uh then all of a
sudden uh they'll know what their body's
at what's the time of day that they
could be taking a secondary therapy. Uh
but it varies from one person to the
next.
I I get this a lot when I try to get
people into ketosis, but a lot of people
are afraid that the ketogenic diet isn't
safe long term because we don't have any
long-term studies. But my understanding
it's a metabolic state, right? So being
in ketosis longterm shouldn't be an
issue. But what are your thoughts on
that?
>> We were in ketosis for the majority of
our existence as a species,
right? We lived
how old? We're about 1.5 million years
as a species um on the planet. So the
paleolithic period of our existence was
always in ketosis because we didn't have
any processed carbohydrates in our diet.
Uh where are we going to get carbs?
We're killing an elephant or a buffalo,
chopping it up and eating it with a lot
of energy there. Where's the carbs
coming from this guy? The the only carbs
you're going to get perhaps is eating
the liver. Uh the liver is loaded with
glycogen. Uh but you know, you're doing
a lot of work to get that little bit of
glucose out of the out of the and you
have to eat a lot of it. You know, you
really have to pound it down. Um so we
were always in a state of ketosis. The
question now is why is it so difficult
for us to get back into that state that
we evolved in? Hundreds of thousands of
years. We're in one state. All of a
sudden, within the last 50 years, we're
in a totally different environment,
preventing us from being in nutritional
ketosis because the foods are so tasty,
they're abundant, they're everywhere,
>> and it's very hard. And you say, "Oh
man, I I do this, I do that." Yeah.
Because our environment is different.
So, as I said over and over again to a
lot of people,
I I said, um, our technology has evolved
so much faster than our biology.
We are all still paleolithic people
living in a new age and we have an
obesity epidemic because in order for us
to survive as a species for hundreds of
thousands of years, we had to we had to
be incredibly efficient in storing
energy. Energy is stored in fat cells.
So we are so geared for our existence as
a starved species with no very little if
any carbs in the environment. Now we
have all these carbs and what is what do
we do? Our biology is telling us store
the carbs. We don't know when we're
going to be starving again. No. Now,
well, we got obesity, cancer, diabetes,
and all that. This is our This is This
is evol. People say, "Well, I don't
understand evolution. I don't believe in
Do you believe in the obesity epidemic?"
That's evolution in action. Do you
believe in diabetes epidemic? That's
evolution in action. If you don't
understand evolution, just look around.
That's what that's evolution. thousands
and thousands of years in a particular
environment all of a sudden shifted in a
very short period of time and our bodies
are telling us this is not where we came
from. This is not this is not who we
are. This is our technology and our
environment illustrating the biology of
our biology now interacts with the new
environment. We have all these chronic
diseases not complicated.
>> Yeah. Yeah. So when I have seen people
be in long-term ketosis, their ketone
levels uh like the production they can
kind of drop over a period of time like
a year into it. Um do you have any ideas
about should people cycle at that point
of going in and out of ketosis to to
increase their therapeutic levels?
>> You know, it's hard to say. Yeah, I know
what you're saying. But my good friend
Dominic Di Austin Agugustino like he's
always in ketosis, you know, he eats
squirrels and stuff. I mean, he's like a
pale he's like the the a pale uh the
modern man living a paleolithic
lifestyle and stuff and he's always in
keto never he's he rarely if ever falls
out of this. He's just living like we
always were living. And uh so uh I think
people make too much of this. So they
feel they got to eat fat, they got to
eat this, they got to eat that. Um what
we find though it's a little bit more
difficult to remain in ketosis on vegan
or vegetarian kinds of things. Um but
not impossible. Uh but uh we evolved to
eat meat. I mean we made a lot of
animals extinct by killing and eating
them. Uh big paper came out of Israel
not too long ago. Uh human beings uh ate
killed and ate the the the strongest
members of the animal societies like the
not the not the very young or the old.
They ate they killed and ate the the
strongest ones because the marrow in the
bones of these strong animals was better
than the young and the old. So if you're
eating the main protectors of your of
your species, then the weak, the old and
the weak become become food for the
predators and that and then the animals
go extinct. So, our species was
responsible for the extinction of
several animal species on the planet
because we ate them and we basically ate
them, you know, and uh but you can get
into ketosis with a pescatarian diet, a
a Mediterranean diet, a carnivore diet,
yes, a vegan. Uh but it's harder. It
it's harder. Uh but I always use the GKI
>> is the is the quantitative measure. So,
you don't have to worry about what
you're eating. People say, "Can I eat
that?" I don't know. you do it and tell
me what your G what happens to your GKI
and they'll say, "Oh, it went up. Why
don't eat that?"
>> That's awesome. Yeah. I love I It's a
lot of people want to say, "Oh, this
food is keto and this one's not." And
it's it's just not true. A lot of people
have blood sugar spikes from food
sensitivities to certain foods and and
that can impact your specific ketogenic
diet. If you want to
>> diet,
>> they're not using the GKI. They need to
use the GKI. And they know all these
diet questions become less important.
They're the ones who can know what they
can eat and not eat. This guy might be
able to eat what you can't eat. Who
knows?
>> Try. Everybody walking around with if if
the if they're of this concern and
they're worried about this and that,
then they all should be knowing what
their GKI is. So they know what their
bodies are capable of taking in and
being in ketosis.
>> Not complicated.
>> One quick question too with being in
ketosis more long term. I know the the
that being in a ketogenic state lowers
the reactive reactive oxidized species
the RO in the cell but that I've heard
the RO is also a signaling molecule and
so it can be somewhat needed. Is there
is there an issue with getting too
little RO production on occasion? Okay.
>> No, you're still going to get the the
adequate amount. It's having too much.
It's having too much. uh Ross always
come from uh no we will always have a
small amount of reactive oxygen species
but keto burning ketones keeps it down
so it doesn't get out of control it's
the ultimate health state nutritional
ketosis is who we who we are we're all
in an un we're bombarded to knock us out
of the state every day at on television
uh you'll see all these beautiful pizzas
and donuts and and Big Macs and all
kinds of stuff all the time, right? And
they're delicious. Don't get me wrong.
I'm not one of these guys. I'll eat a
pizza jelly fil donut. You kidding me?
Wash, you know, but I'm not going to do
it all the time. And I get and exercise,
exercise is an extremely important
component. Um, you know, so we have the
the cancer diet and lifestyle. If if you
want cancer, if you would like to get
cancer, there are certain things you
need to do. Uh I'm not talking about
preventing cancer. I'm talking about uh
getting what is the best things we can
do to get cancer?
>> Uh minimal exercise. Don't exercise.
Don't do do whatever you can. Take the
elevator. Never take the stairs. Always
uh never never walk anywhere. Get a get
a ride from somebody. Um, that's one
way. Uh, another way is you got to eat a
lot of of highly processed carbohydrate
foods. You got to make sure that's the
main component of your diet. God forbid
you eat anything natural. So, garden
grown stuff. No, no, get away from that.
You got to eat highly processed. If you
want cancer, I'm telling you what you
need to do, what people do. And if you
and if you if you look at what we do as
a speech, we're doing exactly what I'm
telling you. You got to be under a lot
of emotional stress. Got to have a lot
of stress. uh you're freaked out all the
time. Somebody says something on on
social media on the cell phone, you get
all bent out of shape. You don't
exercise, you eat bad foods, you're
under a lot of stress. Make sure you
don't get a good night's sleep. Can't
get good night's sleep. Uh this is
another thing. So, you have bad sleep,
bad food, no exercise, a lot of
emotional stress, and you put all that
together, and you now are prime
candidate for getting cancer. And you do
it uh over and over again, and you live
in this kind of stressful, unexceded,
poor diet lifestyle. And now we're
seeing more and more young people. I get
so many emails from people asking for
help. Um, and uh, you know, I tell them
what they need to do. I don't tell them.
I I'm not a physician. I cannot tell
anybody what to do or what not to do. I
just give them educational information
and they make the decisions for
themselves. Um, and and you know, we're
seeing so many young people now. I I'm
telling you, in the 30s, early 40s, the
people with colorectal cancer, lung
cancer, breast cancer. I I never I don't
So clearly we're having an earlier and
earlier onset of cancer. Uh which used
to be mostly an old old folks kind of a
thing. Uh now it's like striking and
that's clearly related to our diet
lifestyle. All those things that I said
we're doing we're doing. You know
there's another one here. Sleep. Yeah. A
lot of emotion. Oh the other thing is uh
uh lack of happiness.
>> Um well you're not happy about life.
You're kind of always miserable or
somebody. So you put all these things
together that I just said and it really
is the diet and lifestyle for getting
cancer and unfortunately
uh this is happening. It's not only
happening in the United States, it's
happening all over the world. It's just
it's the glo our globalization of food
and technology has now put us at risk uh
for not only cancer but diabetes,
cardiovascular disease, dementia, all of
the different chronic diseases that we
have.
>> Yeah. And I'm wondering if we could talk
a bit more for the cancer patient of how
to address the glutamine. So I've heard
you talk about drugs that target
glutamine. I'm wondering if you could
speak to that. And and I'm also
wondering are there physicians who do
work from this orientation with the
ketogenic diet and um prescribing drugs
that will address uh the the the
glutamine as well. Well, unfortunately
that's the problem. You see, we work
under a standard of care and the cancer
standard of care is mostly uh radiation
and chemo and surgical. Uh metabolic
therapy does use surgery, ketogenic
metabolic therapy, putting the body into
a state of nutritional ketosis and then
targeting the glutamine. There's no no
place uh anywhere on the planet that I
know of now that's doing what we we have
recommended specifically. Um and the
reason for that is they think it's a
genetic disease and they're locked into
a standard of care uh that says we must
uh uh uh surgically debulk this
do a surgical procedure or radiation or
chemical right up front really quick.
Um, no, no, no. That's not the right
right way to deal with this problem. You
you have to bring your body into a
non-inflammatory
state, which is nutritional ketosis.
Tumor cells start to get hammered. The
tumors become much more circumscribed.
The surgeon can then make a conscious
attention to say we can debulk this
whole thing real quick. Uh, we would
transition you over then to targeting
glutamine with a with a pulse. We don't
use toxic chemicals unless
uh we can assure that the toxic chemical
will be in fact non-toxic in killing the
tumor cells because we are now in a
state of nutritional ketosis. So we have
to re re-evaluate the whole standard and
we're not allowed to do that. Um the
field the doctors who would love to do
uh metabolic therapy to manage their
patients the system does not allow that.
if they were to treat patients uh
outside of the standard of care, their
license to practice medicine could be in
jeopardy. So uh clinics are not
available. All of what I have said is is
what we know to do this effectively
manage this this this and eventually
will become the standard of care. It
just takes time for the um confirmation
bias and the silent assumptions to
crumble uh and then there'll be a
stampede uh to do this. But it's going
to be requiring uh physicians to be
retrained. Uh they have to know uh how
to do this. They they're practicing now
their art of medicine. It's
unbelievable. They're going to be so
excited because each person is going to
be a different a different uh entity for
them. It's not one shoe fits all. So
like we do, we we bring the the people
who can do this in these small clinics
uh will look at the patients. They get
their blood work all back.
A lot of patients are sick from
parasites, from obesity, from have all
kinds of problems, diabetes. You got to
bring that patient back into a into a
stable state of of health in in part.
Then you come in with the glutamine
targeting drugs. The most effective one
was um six deoxyorine, which is Don,
which was used in the clinic on on
children and other cancer patients in
the past. They were using it at an
incorrect dosage and never targeted
glucose at the same time. never brought
the patient into a keto. When we bring
the p the the we have pre-clinical
models of the best of metastatic cancer
and brain cancer and this kind of thing.
When we get those animal preclinical
systems into nutritional ketosis, we use
small amounts of these glutamine
targeting drugs. And you have to do it
strategically because our our immune
system and gut and ura cycles all use
that same molecule. So the tumor cells
and the our normal cells uh are using
the same our immune cells, our immune
cells that will eventually pick up the
dead corpses of cancer cells. They also
need the glutamine. So if you're too
aggressive on this, you're you kill
tumor cells, but you paralyze the very
cells needed to remove the corpses from
the tissue.
>> So you have to strategically know the
biology of what you're doing and why
you're doing what you're doing. You
don't want to harm your gut. You don't
want to harm your immune system. You
want your gut to be healthy and your
immune system to be strong. Uh because
what we found out when we take away
glucose and glutamine, tumor cells die,
the the the the immune cells can switch
to ketone bodies and they just become
slightly paralyzed from the glutamine
target, but they don't die. So as soon
as you pull the glutamine back, these
guys are alive. Bang, they'll take off
those tumor cells. So you have to know
how to do this dosage, timing, and
scheduling of these different
procedures. And all while the patient is
getting healthier. This is not the
patient gets healthier and healthier as
you do this. So a lot of times the
diabetes goes away, the hypertension,
the high blood pressure, all that stuff
goes away along with the slow degrading
of your tumor. So it's really beautiful.
It's unbelievable when it's done
correctly uh by the right people who
know what to do and how to do it and by
a compliant patient.
>> The patient themselves must know this.
Mhm.
>> And we find that if if the if the family
the pat need the patient or the family
are not on board, forget it. Doesn't
work. So you got to have a compliant
patient. And we find the ones that are
most compliant, understand the concepts
are the ones that do the best. It's
unbelievable. They really do well.
>> So you've done specific studies on the
dosing, the pulsing, the length of time,
and which drugs to use and the or
Yeah. Can you talk about which ones?
That's where the cutting that's the
cutting edge right now. We we haven't
not we have not yet perfected that.
>> Uh and we're learning all the time on
how to do that. That's why this
metabolic therapy cannot be done with
large clinical trials yet because we
don't know enough about uh the doses
timing and scheduling of the diet drug
combinations. But that's not going to
take too long. The problem is it's very
hard to get funding uh for that type.
It's not sexy science, you know, it's
trial and error kind of science. What
works best for this person and that. So,
and when you do a clinical trial, you
can't say one shoe fits all. And
besides, we're using diet drug
combinations that we pull off and put on
as we see how the patient is responding
to this. So, the whole concept of how to
do clinical trials has to be uh
re-evaluated.
>> We can't do what we're doing with these
toxic drugs they give you the cancer
patients.
>> Yeah. So can the average person find a
practitioner today? You said that there
are people who are doing this well but
and when when it is done well it works
but especially with the drug piece like
which drugs how do you know find a per a
person who can uh give you the right
drugs to work on
>> well that's the other problem too the
the dawn is not available um and they
and they know that I I would say they
said they it wasn't it didn't work and
it was too toxic. So I went back and it
didn't work because they didn't use it
the right way and its toxicity was
nothing compared to some of the toxic
drugs we give to these cancer patients
today. Cis platin pristine I mean these
are horrible drugs.
>> Yeah never was as toxic as these things.
>> Can you say that one again? I I'm not
led. other drugs that we use like
cisplatin and we call one of them is red
devil you know doc rubison you know I
mean hair falls out you know I always
said when you see a cancer a bald cancer
patient you knew he was tra treated by
someone who has doesn't really
understand the biology of the problem uh
cancer cells do not hide in your hair
follicles uh so why your hair falls out
you're trying to kill a cancer cell not
go bald right they're just trying to
poison everything and hope that that's
that's that's what we call medieval
>> they're using m medieval You don't have
an understanding of the biology. How you
expect to know if this going to work?
And and there by the grace of God, we
get a lot of people surviving cancer
despite the fact that they were
surgically mutilated, poisoned, and
irradiated. I mean, think about it. You
know, the nice thing about metabolic
therapy is that not only is it a good
way to manage uh an aggressive tumor,
but it's also can be used to prevent
cancer. So part of it obviously we're
not going to use glutamine targeting
drugs uh to prevent cancer but we can
use a large part of metabolic therapy to
prevent cancer but when we want to
manage cancer we just bring in glutamine
targeting drugs along with the so I
don't know anyone maybe you guys do I
don't know anyone who goes down to the
top cancer clinics Dana Farber MD
Anderson Sloan Karing Moffett and all
these please give me radiation and chemo
as a pro as a prophylactic tactic to get
big. Nobody does that, right?
>> Why would you do it if you have cancer?
>> Yeah, exactly.
>> Makes no sense.
>> Professor Se, we're getting to the end
of the the time here. I wish we could we
could talk more. Um, but if people are
interested in learning more about your
work, uh, supporting your your work,
your research, where's a good place to
direct them? Yeah. Well, we we we get
our support mostly from philanthropic
contributions to uh Travis
Kristofferson's foundation for cancer
metabolic therapies and also through
directly through my university Boston
College. Uh that money comes to our
biology department and supports our our
our research. Uh and I know I've said so
many things but we we have it all
published on open access papers in the
scientific literature. So any with
Google anybody who had access to the
internet can just put my name in say
what is this guy publishing and then
you'll see the papers and it goes into a
much greater level of of detail our
press pulse therapeutic strategy which
is kind of what I mentioned here is
given in great it's the outline the
framework the actual fleshing it out we
have a big paper under review unit right
now which is a treatment protocol that
will be adapted into the clinics once
it's finished and out there which is
really fleshing out the framework
framework uh of what we're saying. So uh
and all cancers are responders. Don't
people say, "Oh, what about co what
about prostate? What about they're all
the same. We can't find any cancer not
dependent on glucose and glutamine." So
they're all the same in that regard.
They're all genetically different.
They're all similar metabolically. So uh
we know it'll work for all the different
blood cancers, all these different
people, oh it work on my cancer. We I I
did a I' I've looked at all the major
cancers. They all have the same problem.
They're all they're all have the same
they're all fermentors. So uh it's
unbelievable, isn't it? It's
unbelievable. So when people people give
us significant amounts of money,
>> uh uh what I what I do is I include them
as in the our acknowledgements of the
paper. So when people look at
acknowledgements like who's supporting
our research, different people in
foundations, sometimes that's all they
want. Some guy says, you know, I I just
want to be part of this big change. I
like to say support it and if he gives
us the money, I put his name supported.
So the guy feels good. I said, "Well,
look at my name's on this big paper that
came out." So
>> yeah,
>> as in the acknowledgement section, we
thank we thank those that those guys
that are supporting it's going to be the
new standard of care at some point in
the future. So uh uh but right now it's
still at the very very beginning stage.
So you'll see when you're my age,
everybody will be be treated by
ketogenic metabolic therapy.